FINAL FANTASY IV
RE-TRANSLATION / REVISION v3.21 10th Anniversary Edition [07/03/2001] [M/D/Y]
J2E TRANSLATIONS
http://www.j2etranslations.com
http://www.j2e.org
J2e@j2e.org

---------------------------------
CONTENTS

1.	TRANSLATION HISTORY
2.	WHY RE-TRANSLATE?
3.	J2E STAFF
4.	SPECIAL NOTES
5.	APPLYING THE IPS PATCH
6.	HOW YOU CAN HELP
7.	COPYWRIGHT PERMISSIONS

---------------------------------
1.	TRANSLATION HISTORY

The FF4j translation was much more than just any ordinary
translation. What started off as several different independent
translation projects in competition with each other has become
one of the biggest translation projects/groups on the net!
Through working together J2e Translations has achieved
great goals that have, and will continue to revolutionize the
translation scene! For a little history, most of the small
FF4 translations started around August of 1997.  These included
several groups known as the Silicon Travelers, HELLSTORM
TRANSLATIONS, and more!  All of these groups had mainly decided
to translate the japanese version of FF4 mostly to gain
ROM-HACKING experience due to the lack of translators in the
scene at the time.  These groups had been using the
american version of Final Fantasy 4, known as Final Fantasy 2
here, as a base and reference to their FF4 translations.
Anyways, at the time the 3 biggest FF4 translation groups were
HELLSTORM TRANSLATIONS, a solo translation carried out by
Anus P., Blasted2/Necrosaro translation group, who else coulda
been in it??, and the Silicon travelers, headed by P-Funk.
Around the end of November/beginning of December was when
big things started to happen.  Apparently at the time
The Silicon Travelers seemed to have died out, and Anus P.
joined up with Blasted2 and Necrosaro to form a completely
new translation group known as J2e translations.  Also at that
time we managed to get other people to do some great things for
us. We had contacted Ian Kelly, the man responsible for
creating the useful FF4/2us differences document, only to
learn that he had been translating FF4 for someone else already.
But after talking for a bit, we managed to get some help,
and Ian Kelly had decided to translate the scripts for us
as soon as we got them all dumped! Also at that time, we had
met a guy named Joke, responisble for translating FF4 to Thai.
This guy was a great guy. He was able to use FF2us's code for
Dual-Tile Encoding and incorporate it into FF4j!  What Dual-Tile
Encoding enabled us to do was store 2 letters as one byte in the
rom, thus letting us have as much text as we needed without
needing to expand the rom size!  So while Ian Kelly was
translating those scripts we decided to take the text from FF2us
and paste it into FF4j, thus giving us a temporary patch to
release! A little bit later however, we had learned that
The Silicon Travelers was alive and well!  Although now the
only 2 members of it were P-Funk and Rydia, another useful
translator! So we had finally gotten ourselves competition again,
especially since P-Funk was learning ASM HACKING at the time!
But we had then talked with him and got him to join J2e with us.
This meant we now had an ASM HACKER, and another translator!
also because of the fact that Dark Force was responsible for
teaching P-Funk ASM, we had also managed to get him on our team!
It was at that point that we had decided to drop DTE in our
translation and use ROM-Expansion to fit all the text in.
Although Rom Expansion wasn't needed at the time because of DTE,
it had allowed us to use FF4's original Dual-Tile Encoding to
print out 2 tile vertically instead of 2 tiles horizontally.
What this let us do was bring a new 16x8 font into the game
rather than the old 8x8! The person behind this was Anus P. He
had also made it so that the old 8x8 font was still in the game.
Shortly after all this, and the main scripts had been translated,
J2e had revolutionized translations once again by devising new
script insertion methods which a couple of well known groups have
adopted from us. The program used to make these insertions
was created by Necrosaro.  Originally it was designed
specifically for FF4, but has recently been released to the
public as "Thingy". These script insertion methods allowed us to
make changes to the scripts easily, and it was less time-consuming.
Once the main scripts were in FF4, however, Dark Force had introduced
us to a guy named Trainspotter. He is an expert in japanese
translating, and script revising. That's when the FF4j translation
became a translation/revision. He had perfected the scripts to sound
a lot better and make the overall game play more enjoyable!
We released the translation earlier last year, but we have since expanded
many windows and lines of text for an even more professional quality
translation. In fact this version almost looks like a completely different
hack from the last release. Enjoy!

---------------------------------
2.	WHY RE-TRANSLATE?

Why would we re-translate a game already translated here in
North America? Simple... Square Soft did a HORRIBLE job
translating this game! They used bad english, tons of
abbreviations, and censored out many important parts of the story
that were in the japanese scripts! Also FF2us was based on FF4j
Easytype, which was alot easier than the hardtype version which is
what we translated. Also in the Easytype version many things
(like items and stuff) were censored out, but with this
translation you get everything that was origianally
meant to be in FF4!  including the ever famous Porno Mag! hehehe

---------------------------------
3.	J2E STAFF

Anus P.		-Text replacements in rom
		-Script formatting
		-Font designer
		-Assembly Programming

Blasted 2	-Text replacements
		-Web maintainer

Necrosaro	-Text replacements
		-Script formatting
		-Script insertions
		-Tool programmer
		-Assembly Programming

Dark Force	-Assembly Programming

P-Funk		-Assembly Programming
		-Text replacements

Ian Kelly	-Translator

Trainspotter	-Script revisor
		-Translator

Rydia		-Translator

UnaFarmer	-Translator


*THANKS*
J2e would like to thank the following people for their help


Joke
J3DI
F.H.
Jeff Bolz
ZSKNIGHT
Pan
Thermopyle
J. Man
Toma XIII
Ballz
Sephiroth
The Dumper


---------------------------------
4.	SPECIAL NOTES

	   Unfortunately due to an error in ZSNES the whole credits are not
	   displayed when completing the game. In order to view the credits,
	   use snes9x or any other emulator.

	   SAVE GAMES - Do NOT continue from save games earlier than version 3.0!
           Doing so will result in strange errors when playing the game (such as
           character having the wrong names and other strange bugs). If you do not
	   have a savegame from one of our more recent releases (version 3.0
	   and above), then start a new game from the beginning and you should
	   not have any errors when playing the game.


---------------------------------
5.	APPLYING THE IPS PATCH

Download the FF4j original rom, then make a copy of it if you
would like. The get the patch "FF4EV321.IPS" and then get
SNESTOOL to patch the ips to the FF4j rom. SNESTOOL is fairly
easy to use. Just select "apply IPS" and follow the on-screen
instructions.

---------------------------------
6.	HOW YOU CAN HELP

If you see any errors in our script (bad spacing, bad text
wrapping, etc...) please tell us so we can get right on it!
necrosaro would like to thank everyone on the J2e wwwboard who
reported all the bugs in our earlier releases!

---------------------------------
7.	COPYRIGHT PERMISSIONS

This patch was created through the hard work of the many people
at J2e and we would appreciate it that you do NOT distribute the
PATCHED rom! If you are going to distribute this translation distribute
it in an IPS form and include any contents of the zip file the patch came with,
including this text file you are now reading!


For any people wanting to translate Final Fantasy IV into another language, we
strongly recommend you hack the FF4J rom and not the pre-patched FF4e rom.
If you insist on using the translated FF4e rom as the basis for your translation,
contact us at J2e and maybe we can work out an agreement. If you wish to use
the FF4e scripts and not the FF4e rom, you are free to use them, just ask and
remember to give credit and thanks for the scripts on your webpage!

Thanks, and enjoy!
