Galaxy Robo English Language Patch


Introduction:

	Japanese Developer:				Copya Systems
	Japanese Publisher:				Imagineer
	Japanese Release:				March 11, 1994
	English Patch Production:			Dynamic-Designs


Dynamic-Designs Patch History:

	V1.00:  Initial Dynamic-Designs release:	July, 19, 2015
	V1.10:  New font and Updates:				Dec., 28, 2015
			- New 8x8 font drawn by Taskforce
			- Corrects Mecha parts abbreviation "RE" to "LE" (Thanks Maeson!)


Dynamic-Designs Production Credits:

	Project Coordination:				Draken
	Hacking/Tools/Bug Fixing:			Bongo`
	Translation:					Filler
	Editors/Writers:				Draken, WildBill
	Beta Testing:					ChronoMoogle, Filler, Recca


Dedication:

This project is dedicated to Satoru Iwata for helping create so many great games. 


Game Description:

Galaxy Robo is a sci-fi strategy game created by Copya Systems, the developper also responsible for
the Lennus series. In this game the player directs a group of mech pilots, each riding distinctive bi-
pedal suits and other vehicles. The game is structurally similar to Fire Emblem; the player moves all
their units for their turn, either fighting enemy units or performing other tasks, and then control
switches to the opponent. When two units meet in combat, a cutaway cutscene shows the aggressor
landing (or missing) a hit, and the unit statistics underneath tell the player how much damage was
caused.

The game was a Japanese exclusive, and it was one of a handful of games to use the SNES Mouse
peripheral.

-Description adapted from giantbomb.com-


Production and Testing:

This translation was a project originally started by Filler in early 2015 and was first brought to
the public's attention over at his site, Matt's Messy Room.  After completing the translation, he
approached Bongo` to get help with some of the hacking, and soon after, Filler made the decision to
hand this project over to D-D.  

At this point, I (Draken) stepped forward to coordinate the project, and was quite surprised to be
handed a project that was very nearly complete. After editing the script several times and testing
the rom to catch any issues that were present, the script was given back to Filler to approve any
changes that were made. After Filler had given me then thumbs up, the script was then handed over to
WildBill for a final pass/edit, and after very speedy work on his part, we had a complete script.

At this point official beta testing began by Recca, Chronomoogle, and Filler, and after a very, very
short amount of time, we had a final patch ready for the public to enjoy!

All-in-all this was the quickest project ever released by D-D. Thanks Filler!

-Draken-


Patching:

Contained within this archive are an IPS (international patching system) file and other patch files
in several formats for the end user's convenience that when used in conjunction with a ROM file,
preferably one extracted from an original, legally bought Super Famicom Galaxy Robo cartridge, will
make the game playable in English.

Do note that these patches are a result of countless hours of love and labor. Hence, they are not
meant to be sold at any price under any circumstance, be it in digital form or burnt into a donor
cart's ROM chip.

To patch the ROM file, one needs to procure a patcher for the preferred format, a widely available
class of programs, many of which can be found at www.romhacking.net/ for one source.

At some point,
ROM sites may upload pre-patched ROMs of our Galaxy Robo translation.  Obviously, D-D cannot endorse
playing these versions, nor will we support resolution of any associated problems.  Moreover, pre-
patched ROMs may float around the web for years.  Only by downloading patches containing just our
original work from D-D's web site may gamers obtain revisions to these patches - if any - and take
advantage of possible bug-fixes and corrections.

Below is the information pertaining the ROM file our patch requires, 
according to Nach's SNES ROM
Tools:


NSRT v3.4 -  Nach's SNES ROM Tools


---------------------Internal ROM Info----------------------
       File: GRobo(J).smc
       Name: GALAXY ROBO              Company: Imagineer
     Header: None                        Bank: LoROM
Interleaved: None                        SRAM: 64 Kb
       Type: Normal + Batt                ROM: 12 Mb
    Country: Japan                      Video: NTSC
  ROM Speed: 200ns (SlowROM)         Revision: 1.0
   Checksum: Good 0x715B            Game Code: 
---------------------------Hashes---------------------------
      CRC32: BEE62812
        MD5: 52C34E40808950A2C985C1C3962C30D9

*Take SPECIAL NOTE that the original rom lacks a header.  You may have to remove the header from your
ROM file, but don't worry as there are a variety of programs that do this, such as SNESTool, Smile,
Toolbox, etc.  

Size before patching: 1.50 MB (1,572,864 bytes)

Size after patching: 1.50 MB (1,572,864 bytes)

Alternatively, most emulators support a feature called soft patching, which keeps the ROM file intact,
merging the patch data only during run time. To make use of it, make sure both the ROM file and the
IPS are on the same directory as your emulator of choice and have the same name, but not the same
extension. Do note that this is case-sensitive.  (Also, do note this soft patching is only available
using the IPS patch file, and may NOT work with the other patch file formats.)

e.g:  GalaxyRobo.smc and GalaxyRobo.ips will trigger soft patching at the emulator's run time.


Emulator Compatibility:

The game behaves itself properly in a wide range of emulators such as Higan, SnesGT and SNES9X, so the
user is free to use whichever he/she is most comfortable with. However, as is the case with several
games, especially timing sensitive ones, Zsnes should be avoided.  Although the game is fully playable
from start to finish with no major problems, one can experience slight graphical glitches in the
battle menus when using this emulator, which one would not see when using any of the previously
mentioned programs.


Special Thanks:

Without these people, it just wouldn't have been possible or fun:

All of the great staff at D-D; Filler, ChronoMoogle, and Recca for beta testing; and of course, the D-D
forum community!
