Final Fantasy 4 - Cosmetic Changes 2
------------------------------------
By Spooniest
Based on "Final Fantasy 4 - Cosmetic Changes" by Joel Smith
and
"Final Fantasy 4" by J2e

Made using Windhex and LunarIPS

This is a retouching of the J2e script for Final Fantasy 4.
I liked the Cosmetic Changes hack, but there were still lots
of things that irked me about the text. Also, I wanted to get
my feet wet using a hex editor, because I'm thinking about
porting in the DS script, if I can get the help I need to do
it.

To apply this patch, you will need a copy of Final Fantasy IV (J).
I reccomend using LunarIPS.

List of changes from Joel Smith's "FF4 Cosmetic Changes":

1. The soldier on the left in the main hall of Baron castle breaks verb tense. This was changed.
2. The soldier on the left at the table in the barracks says "at Mysidia," which was changed to "in Mysidia."
3. Rosa's line "You're not like that" was changed to the DS's "You're a good man, Cecil.."
4. Rosa's line "The real Cecil I know..." was changed to the DS's "Cecil of the Red Wings is many things..."
5. Cecil's DS line "I know what I've become..." was added.
6. In Mist Village, Cecil's line "WHY? King Baron! No!" was truncated to match the DS version
7. A Scholar in Kaipo refers to "A strange old guy by the Waterway..." This was changed to "A strange old guy in the Waterway"
8. The line about Edward's spoony-ness was put back in.
9. Cecil's beratement of Edward was toned down.
10. The woman at the bar in Fabul had a line where the clauses were inverted.
11. Kain's line "I intend to" at Fabul was changed to "Indeed."
12. Numerous instances of double exclamation points were removed.
13. The Fabul bartender says "helluva attack," which was changed to "helluvan attack"
14. During the interlude with Kain and Golbez at the start of Mt. Ordeals, Kain says "Take light of," which was changed to "Take Cecil too lightly"
15. Numerous instances of this "!?" were changed to this "?!"
16. After fighting Cagnazzo, Cid says "Whaddya mean? I'm not over-the-hill yet!" This was changed to "Whadaya mean? I'm not over the hill yet!"
17. In the village of Mist, one of the villagers says "Phantom Beast" and "Beast" wasn't capitalized. Now it is.
18. After fighting Barbariccia, Cecil says "But it was left at the Tower of Zott?" which is a statement, not a question. The question mark was changed.
19. Golbez's battle quote to Cecil was changed to the one from the DS version.
20. One of the Dwarves at the top of Jiott's castle says "Out of the unusual." This was changed to "Out of the ordinary."
21. FuSoYa says "between the fourth and fifth planet of the solar system." This was changed to "between the fourth and fifth planets of our star system."
22. One of the Moon Crystals talks about the Tower of Babil being destroyed, but this is meant to be referring to the Giant of Babil being destroyed. It now does.
23. Rydia's line in Mist "I hate you all!!" was changed to "I HATE YOU!!"
24. A villager in Kaipo says the Prince of Damcyan has "a voice of an angel." This was changed to "sings like an angel."
25. Tella says "We've have no time for this!" to Cid. This was changed to "We've got no time for this!"
26. The "Ihe" the appears in the text crawl at the end was changed to "The."
----

Disclaimer: By downloading this patch, you agree
to release me from any and all damages that may
occur to you, your property, or your immiediate
or extended family as a result of anything you
do with the files contained therein. I will
by no means be held accountable for anything
that happens to you as a result of using these
files. By downloading them, you agree that you
will pursue no legal action against me for
any reason pertaining to use of the content
herein.