Sailor Moon Super S Floating Panic English Language Patch V1.01Introduction:
	Japanese Developer:				Tom Create	Japanese Publisher:				Bandai 	Japanese Release:				December 08, 1995	English Patch Production:			Dynamic-Designs

Dynamic-Designs Patch History:
	V1.00:  Initial Dynamic-Designs Release:	August 10, 2016        V1.01:  Replaced the pause screen we missed 	August 18, 2016                during the initial release with                 English and replaced the font with                 a more readable version at the                 request of players.
Dynamic-Designs Production Credits:
	Project Coordination:				Taskforce	Hacking/Tools/Bug Fixing:			Bongo`        Assembly: 					Bongo`	Translation:					Filler	English Graphics:				Taskforce	Script Writing:					Taskforce and Draken	Beta Testing:					Taskforce	Splash:						Taskforce

Game Description:Description From Moby-Games: http://www.mobygames.com/game/hyper-iria
Sailor Moon Super S: Floating Panic is a Sailor Moon themed competitivepuzzle style game. In one player Story Mode, players first select a characterfrom among five inner Sailor Senshi/Scouts and Chibiusa/Rini, each with a uniquespecial move. They will then challenge each of the other Senshi/Scouts in competition.Each player has a board which contains some balloons, in either red, yellow,green, orange, pink or blue. The harder the difficulty, the more colors there are.These balloons can be shot at in order to gain points and fill up the power bar.Balloons of the same color that are adjacent to one another with all be destroyedand generate more points. The goal is to avoid being the player whose balloons arepushed downwards off the board, and to make the opponent receive this fate. As groupsof balloons are destroyed, they can reveal power-ups as well as producegray balloons on the opponent's board. Gray balloons can only bedestroyed by groups of colored balloons being removed adjacent to them.Players with a filled power bar can unleash special abilities to helpthemselves or hurt their opponent.The game also features a one player vs cpu or two player battle modewhich allows you a chance to play the outer senshi/scouts that you can'tplay in story mode.  This is great fun for parties, and makes an excellentparty game.Finally, the game also has a one player level clearing game.  During thisgame, your character cannot use their special moves.  You clear either a setnumber of balloons, or solve some sort of puzzle the game has setup by clearingall balloons to move on to the next round.  Later boards can get quite challenging.

Production and Testing:
This game's production happened pretty fast.  Taskforce has wanted to tackle this particulargame for a very long time, and finally Bongo` gave in and said he'd be willing to hack it.He then hacked the game very quickly and passed the work over to me, Taskforce.  I gotFiller the stuff he needed for translation, and started to work on the graphical work for the game.Filler helped with the graphics by translating a large amount of graphical text, and then got us allthe text stuff back.  At that point Taskforce and Draken did a quick script edit.  Finally I, Taskforce,playtested the game.  Bongo` did some bug fixes, dumped even more graphics to be edited into English andTaskforce did those then played it through one more time to make sure the new stuff worked as expected.Translations are a big bottleneck to releasing games, and I'd personally really like to giveFiller a lot of thanks for jumping on this and knocking it out even though he is already superbusy. Thank you Filler!  And I'd also like to thank Bongo`, Filler, Draken and all the guys at Dynamic-Designs for puttingup with me while I got this game done.  I probably was a pain now and then, and I apologize if thatwas the case.  Thanks guys for helping me get a game done that I've wanted in English for a long time.It might not have had the great story we hoped it would, but it is still nice seeing it in English finally.And that brings me to my final thoughts.  Before anyone accuses us of making up dialog and throwing it intothis game because the story mode text is so silly.  Let me assure you that what is in the game is what isactually being said in the Japanese version.  Honestly, I don't think we could make up dialog this silly.
-Taskforce-
Patching:First off, there are two patches contained in each zip.  One patch is for those of you that preferthe original names of the Japanese/Viz version of the show/manga.  The other patch is for those ofyou that are used to the DiC/Cloverway dub names.  You do not need to use both patches.  Choose theone you prefer and only use that patch.
Contained within this archive are two IPS (international patching system) files or two patch filesin another format for the end user's convenience that when used (only one needs to be used) inconjunction with a ROM file will make the game playable in English.
Do note that these patches are a result of countless hours of love and labor. Hence, they are notmeant to be sold at any price under any circumstance, be it in digital form or burnt into a donorcart's ROM chip.To patch the ROM file, one needs to procure a patcher for the preferred format, a widely availableclass of programs, many of which can be found at www.romhacking.net/ for one source.  A few can evenbe found on our download page for your convenience.
At some point, ROM sites may upload pre-patched ROMs of our Sailor Moon Super S Floating Panic translation.Obviously, Dynamic Designs cannot endorse playing these versions, nor will we support resolution ofany associated problems. Moreover, pre-patched ROMs may float around the web for years.  Only by downloading patchescontaining just our original work from D-D's web site may gamers obtain revisions to these patches - if any - and takeadvantage of possible bug-fixes and corrections.
Below is the information pertaining the ROM file our patch requires, 
according to Nach's SNES ROM Tools:


---------------------Internal ROM Info----------------------       File: SM-Panic(J).smc       Name: SFC SAILORMOON SUPERS    Company: Bandai     Header: None                        Bank: LoROMInterleaved: None                        SRAM: 0 Kb       Type: Normal                       ROM: 8 Mb    Country: Japan                      Video: NTSC  ROM Speed: 120ns (FastROM)         Revision: 1.0   Checksum: Good 0xB468            Game Code: A9PJ---------------------------Hashes---------------------------      CRC32: B6B92AE0        MD5: 1F6B2FF721F8F0D92736D704F922BA37--------------------------Database--------------------------       Name: Bishoujo Senshi Sailor Moon Super S - Fuwa Fuwa Panic    Country: Japan                   Revision: 1.0     Port 1: Gamepad                   Port 2: Gamepad    Genre 1: Puzzle                   Genre 2: Aim Matching**Also take SPECIAL NOTE that the original rom lacks a header.  You may have to remove the header from yourROM file, but don't worry as there are a variety of programs that do this, such as SNESTool, Smile,Toolbox, etc.  
Size before patching: 1.00 MB (1,048,576 bytes)
Size after patching: 1.50 MB (1,572,864 bytes)
Alternatively, most emulators support a feature called soft patching, which keeps the ROM file intact,merging the patch data only during run time. To make use of it, make sure both the ROM file and theIPS are in the same directory as your emulator of choice and have the same name, but not the sameextension. Do note that this is case-sensitive.  (Also, do note this soft patching is only availableusing the IPS patch file, and may NOT work with the other patch file formats.)
e.g:  SMP.smc and SMP.ips will trigger soft patching at the emulator's run time.

Emulator Compatibility:
The game behaves itself properly in a wide range of emulators such as ZSNES, SnesGT, Mednafen, SNES9X and Higan/BSNES.

Special Thanks:
Without these people, it just wouldn't have been possible or fun:All of the great staff at D-D.  Filler for translating the game, Bongo`for hacking and of course the rest of the D-D forum community!

Readme 2016 Dynamic-Designs